IBC Eureka (#1093)
cosmos/ibc: spec/micro/README.md

Properties of Channel:

- Separates applications into dedicated 1-1 communication channels. This prevents applications from writing into each other's channels.
- Allows applications to come to agreement on the application parameters (version negotiation). Ensures that each side can understand the other's communication and that they are running mutually compatible logic. This version negotiation is a multi-step process that allows the finalized version to differ substantially from the one initially proposed
- Establishes the ordering of the channel
- Establishes unique identifiers for the applications on either chain to use to reference each other when sending and receiving packets.
- The application protocol can be continually upgraded over time by using the upgrade handshake which allows the same channel which may have accumulated state to use new mutually agreed upon application packet data format(s) and associated new logic.
- Ensures exactly-once delivery of packet flow datagrams (Send, Receive, Acknowledge, Timeout)
- Ensures valid packet flow (Send => Receive => Acknowledge) XOR (Send => Timeout)

### Identifying Counterparties

> In core IBC, the connection and channel handshakes serve to validate the clients are valid clients of the counterparty, ensure the IBC version and application versions are mutually compatible, as well as providing unique identifiers for each side to refer to the counterparty.

Reviewer: nit: just slightly easier read

```suggestion
In core IBC, the connection and channel handshakes serve to ensure the validity of counterparty clients, ensure the IBC and application versions are mutually compatible, as well as providing unique identifiers for each side to refer to the counterparty.
```

Since we are removing handshakes in IBC lite, we must have a different way to provide the chain with knowledge of the counterparty. With a client, we can prove any key/value path on the counterparty. However, without knowing which identifier the counterparty uses when it sends messages to us; we cannot differentiate between messages sent from the counterparty to our chain vs messages sent from the counterparty with other chains. Most implementations will not be able to store the ICS-24 paths directly as a key in the global namespace; but will instead write to a reserved, prefixed keyspace so as not to conflict with other application state writes. Thus the counteparty information we must have includes both its identifier for our chain as well as the key prefix under which it will write the provable ICS-24 paths.

> 

Reviewer: I feel like adding a simple diagram of the above will aid significantly in understanding, especially given how critical this is to part of the design.

### IBC Lite

IBC lite will simply provide packet delivery between two chains communicating and identifying each other by on-chain light clients as specified in ICS-02 with application packet data being routed to their specific IBC applications with packet-flow semantics remaining as they were defined in ICS-04. The channelID derived from the clientIDs as mentioned above will tell the IBC router which chain to send the packets to and which chain a received packet came from, while the portID specifies which application on the router the packet should be sent to.

Thus, once two chains have set up clients for each other with specific Identifiers, they can send IBC packets like so.

```typescript
interface Packet {
  sequence: uint64
  timeoutHeight: Height
  timeoutTimestamp: uint64
  sourcePort: Identifier // identifier of the application on sender
  sourceChannel: Identifier // identifier of the client of destination on sender chain
  destPort: Identifier // identifier of the application on destination
  destChannel: Identifier // identifier of the client of sender on the destination chain
}
```

> Since the packets are addressed **directly** with the underlying light clients, there are **no** more handshakes necessary. Instead the packet sender must be capable of providing the correct <client, client> pair.

Reviewer: I feel like it might be worth noting here, that there might be increased bandwidth for relayers or packet senders, with the added benefit of significantly reducing protocol complexity.

# Micro IBC Architecture

### Context

> The implementation of the entire IBC protocol as it currently stands is a large undertaking. While there exists ready-made implementations like ibc-go this is only deployable on the Cosmos-SDK. Similarly, there exists ibc-rs which is a library for chains to integrate. However, this requires the chain to be implemented in Rust, there still exists some non-trivial work to integrate the ibc-rs library into the target state machine, and certain limitations either in the state machine or in ibc-rs may prevent using the library for the target chain.

Reviewer 2: I would say the big advantage is that with this compressed version of the protocol the verification of the state is much more straight forward but slightly compressed into a single round trip which is i think a net win for implementors but probably leaks previous sub domains of the previous layers into a single macro domain but again is a net win.

> The implementation of the entire IBC protocol as it currently stands is a large undertaking. While there exists ready-made implementations like ibc-go this is only deployable on the Cosmos-SDK. Similarly, there exists ibc-rs which is a library for chains to integrate. However, this requires the chain to be implemented in Rust, there still exists some non-trivial work to integrate the ibc-rs library into the target state machine, and certain limitations either in the state machine or in ibc-rs may prevent using the library for the target chain.

Reviewer 3: What's written in the context, in part, are the consequences of the initial design choices that were made. I wonder if we shall point this out or keep it implicit.

The implementation of each of these endpoints will be specific to the particular consensus mechanism targetted. The choice of consensus algorithm itself is arbitrary, it may be a Proof-of-Stake algorithm like CometBFT, or a multisig of trusted authorities, or a rollup that relies on an additional underlying client in order to verify its consensus.

Thus, the endpoints themselves should accept arbitrary bytes for the arguments passed into these client endpoints as it is up to each individual client implementation to unmarshal these bytes into the structures they expect.

```typescript
// initializes client with a starting client state containing all light client parameters
// and an initial consensus state that will act as a trusted seed from which to verify future headers
function createClient(
    clientState: bytes,
    consensusState: bytes,
): (Identifier, error)

// once a client has been created, it can be referenced with the identifier and passed the header
// to keep the client up-to-date. In most cases, this will cause a new consensus state derived from the header
// to be stored in the client
function updateClient(
    clientId: Identifier,
    header: bytes,
): error

> 

Reviewer 2: If the majority of the cases for micro-ibc would be specificially new connections, what would be the motivation for transitioning from an existing client to a micro-client if the work has already been done?

// once a client has been created, relayers can submit misbehaviour that proves the counterparty chain
// The light client must verify the misbehaviour using the trust model of the consensus mechanism
// and execute some custom logic such as freezing the client from accepting future updates and proof verification.
function submitMisbehaviour(
    clientId: Identifier,
    misbehaviour: bytes,

> ): error

Reviewer 2: As in, terminate the client with the reason? I guess the question is how much misbehavior should be tolerated. If it's zero than perhaps it would make sense to change the client state vs accumulate evidence of behavior for a later action.

- Defines which channel orderings are supported

Properties of Channel:

- Separates applications into dedicated 1-1 communication channels. This prevents applications from writing into each other's channels.
- Allows applications to come to agreement on the application parameters (version negotiation). Ensures that each side can understand the other's communication and that they are running mutually compatible logic. This version negotiation is a multi-step process that allows the finalized version to differ substantially from the one initially proposed
- Establishes the ordering of the channel
- Establishes unique identifiers for the applications on either chain to use to reference each other when sending and receiving packets.
- The application protocol can be continually upgraded over time by using the upgrade handshake which allows the same channel which may have accumulated state to use new mutually agreed upon application packet data format(s) and associated new logic.
- Ensures exactly-once delivery of packet flow datagrams (Send, Receive, Acknowledge, Timeout)

> - Ensures valid packet flow (Send => Receive => Acknowledge) XOR (Send => Timeout)

Reviewer 3: Shall we add some diagrams too?

# Micro IBC Architecture

### Context

The implementation of the entire IBC protocol as it currently stands is a large undertaking. While there exists ready-made implementations like ibc-go this is only deployable on the Cosmos-SDK. Similarly, there exists ibc-rs which is a library for chains to integrate. However, this requires the chain to be implemented in Rust, there still exists some non-trivial work to integrate the ibc-rs library into the target state machine, and certain limitations either in the state machine or in ibc-rs may prevent using the library for the target chain.

Writing an implementation from scratch is a problem many ecosystems face as a major barrier for IBC adoption.

> The goal of this document is to serve as a "micro-IBC" specification that will allow new ecosystems to implement a protocol that can communicate with fully implemented IBC chains using the same security assumptions.

Reviewer 3: I guess that another goal of this document is to revisit the initial design choices, learn from them, keep the core meat, and provide a smoother version of protocol that will be useful not only for new ecosystem, but even for cosmos itself.

The micro-IBC protocol must have the same security properties as IBC, and must be completely compatible with IBC applications. It may not have the full flexibility offered by standard IBC.

### Desired Properties

- Light-client backed security
- Unique identifiers for each channel end
- Authenticated application channel (must verify that the counterparty is running the correct client and app parameters)
- Applications must be mutually compatible with standard IBC applications.
- Must be capable of being implemented in smart contract environments with resource constraints and high gas costs.

### Specification

### Light Clients

The light client module can be implemented exactly as-is with regards to its functionality. It **must** have external endpoints for relayers (off-chain processes that have full-node access to other chains in the network) to initialize a client, update the client, and submit misbehaviour in case the trust model of the client is violated by the counterparty consensus mechanism (e.g. committing to different headers for the same height).

> The implementation of each of these endpoints will be specific to the particular consensus mechanism targetted. The choice of consensus algorithm itself is arbitrary, it may be a Proof-of-Stake algorithm like CometBFT, or a multisig of trusted authorities, or a rollup that relies on an additional underlying client in order to verify its consensus.

Reviewer 2: Probably requires single slot finality for the state proofs or some kind of finality gadget.

Reviewer 3: I agree we could include some consideration around consensus finalities here.

Thus, IBC lite will introduce a new message `ProvideCounterparty` that will associate the counterparty client of our chain with our client of the counterparty. Thus, if the `ProvideCounterparty` message is submitted to both sides correctly. Then both sides have mirrored <client,client> pairs that can be treated as channel identifiers. Assuming they are correct, the client on each side is unique and provides an authenticated stream of packet data between the two chains. If the `ProvideCounterparty` message submits the wrong clientID, this can lead to invalid behaviour; but this is equivalent to a relayer submitting an invalid client in place of a correct client for the desired chain. In the simplest case, we can rely on out-of-band social consensus to only send on valid <client, client> pairs that represent a connection between the desired chains of the user; just as we currently rely on out-of-band social consensus that a given clientID and channel built on top of it is the valid, canonical identifier of our desired chain.

```typescript
interface Counterparty {

>     channelId: Identifier

Reviewer 3: I am not entirely sure in this spec we should keep using channelIDs instead of clientIDs. Is this an implementation related detail to ensure compatibility with ibc-go? If yes, shouldn't we use clientIDs in the spec and, additionally, provide a comment stating that the implementation we will be using channelIDs?

All packet flow message (SendPacket, RecvPacket, and TimeoutPacket) are sent with the full packet. The packet contains both sender and receiver identifiers. Thus on packet flow messages sent to the receiver (RecvPacket), we use the receiver identifier in the packet to retrieve our local client and the source identifier to determine which path the sender stored the packet under. We can thus use our retrieved client to verify a key/value membership proof to validate that the packet was sent by the counterparty.

Similarly, for packet flow messages sent to the sender (AcknowledgePacket, TimeoutPacket); the packet is provided again. This time, we use the sender identifier to retrieve the local client and the destination identifier to determine the key path that the receiver must have written to when it received the packet. We can thus use our retrieved client to verify a key/value membership proof to validate that the packet was sent by the counterparty. In the case of timeout, if the packet receipt wasn't written to the receipt path determined by the destination identifier this can be verified by our retrieved client using the key nonmembership proof.

> ### Soundness

Reviewer 3: Note that, potentially, in the future we could enforce client identifiers global uniqueness. For now I agree that  the packet is committed key path is a strong guarantee.

In the packet flow messages sent to the receiver (RecvPacket), the packet send is verified using the client on the destination chain (retrieved using destination identifier) with the packet commitment path derived by the source identifier. This verification check can only pass if the chain identified by the destination client committed the packet we received under the source channel identifier. This is only possible if the destination client is pointing to the original source chain, or if it is pointing to a different chain that committed the exact same packet. Pointing to the original source chain would mean we sent the packet to the correct . Since the sender only sends packets intended for the desination chain by setting to a unique source identifier, we can be sure the packet was indeed intended for us. Since our client on the reciver is also correctly pointing to the sender chain, we are verifying the proof against a specific consensus algorithm that we assume to be honest. If the packet is committed to the wrong key path, then we will not accept the packet. Similarly, if the packet is committed by the wrong chain then we will not be able to verify correctly.

------

> IGNORE THE MULTICHANNEL WORK FOR NOW

Reviewer 3: Potentially we could address the multichannel work in a different PR 👍

    // and packet data, and timeout information in the value
    // For IBC Lite, we can't automatically retrieve the destination port since we don't have an actual stored channel
    // in order to get around this, if sourcePort and destinationPort are the same we will leave the path as-is.
    // if the ports are different than we must append the port ids together
    // so the receiver can verify the requested destination port
    commitPort = sourcePort
    if sourcePort != destPort {
        commitPort = sourcePort + "/" + destPort
    }

    // if the sequence doesn't already exist, this call initializes the sequence to 0
    sequence = channelStore.get(nextSequenceSendPath(commitPort, sourceChannel))
    
    // store commitment to the packet data & packet timeout
    channelStore.set(
      packetCommitmentPath(commitPort, sourceChannel, sequence),
      hash(hash(data), timeoutHeight, timeoutTimestamp)
    )

    // increment the sequence. Thus there are monotonically increasing sequences for packet flow
    // from sourcePort, sourceChannel pair
    channelStore.set(nextSequenceSendPath(commitPort, sourceChannel), sequence+1)

> 

Reviewer 4: This should be making an application callback I think. This is because:
1. Even if we want the packet lifecycle to begin in the IBC app. There is nothing wrong with the application receiving a callback. In fact, this is necessary to receive a reply in the Actor model of CosmWasm.
2. Might make multipacket lifecycle easier to implement
